Rule zero
This rule states that for a system to qualify as an RDBMS, it must be able to manage database entirely through the relational capabilities.

Rule 1: Information rule
All information(including metadata) is to be represented as stored data in cells of tables. The rows and columns have to be strictly unordered.

Rule 2: Guaranted Access
Each unique piece of data(atomic value) should be accesible by : Table Name + Primary Key(Row) + Attribute(column).

NOTE: Ability to directly access via POINTER is a violation of this rule.

Rule 3: Systematic treatment of NULL
Null has several meanings, it can mean missing data, not applicable or no value. It should be handled consistently. 
Also, Primary key must not be null, ever. Expression on NULL must give null.

Rule 4: Active Online Catalog
 Database dictionary(catalog) is the structure description of the complete Database and it must be stored online.
 The Catalog must be governed by same rules as rest of the database.
 The same query language should be used on catalog as used to query database.


Rule 5: Powerful and Well-Structured Language
One well structured language must be there to provide all manners of access to the data stored in the database.
 Example: SQL, etc. If the database allows access to the data without the use of this language, then that is a violation.

Rule 6: View Updation Rule
All the view that are theoretically updatable should be updatable by the system as well.

Rule 7: Relational Level Operation
There must be Insert, Delete, Update operations at each level of relations. Set operation like Union, Intersection and minus should also be supported.

Rule 8: Physical Data Independence
The physical storage of data should not matter to the system. If say, some file supporting table is renamed or moved from one disk to another, 
it should not effect the application.

Rule 9: Logical Data Independence
If there is change in the logical structure(table structures) of the database the user view of data should not change.
 Say, if a table is split into two tables, a new view should give result as the join of the two tables. This rule is most difficult to satisfy.

Rule 10: Integrity Independence
The database should be able to enforce its own integrity rather than using other programs. 
Key and Check constraints, trigger etc, should be stored in Data Dictionary. This also make RDBMS independent of front-end.

Rule 11: Distribution Independence
A database should work properly regardless of its distribution across a network.
 Even if a database is geographically distributed, with data stored in pieces, the end user should get an impression that it is stored at the same place. 
This lays the foundation of distributed database.

Rule 12: Nonsubversion Rule
If low level access is allowed to a system it should not be able to subvert or bypass integrity rules to change the data. 
This can be achieved by some sort of looking or encryption.

